# 3.1IDs

Ethereum and IPFS both contain terabytes of data that could be indexed and queried, with their datasets growing daily. Thus, APIS introduces the concept of IDs, such that only relevant datasets to the APIS’s clients are indexed by APIS Gateways and Nodes. IDs are standardized references to specific Ethereum smart contracts or IPFS hashes that developers wish to index. APIS Gateways and Nodes are incentivized to index all IDs that developers and users find relevant; thus, APIS already supports all notable decentralized finance IDs of notable volume, such that datasets from any automated market maker, decentralized exchange, on-chain lender, and on-chain aggregator can be queried.



IDs are to be requested and added through off-chain proposals on the APIS Governance Module, separate from the on-chain APIS Governance Contract. Once an ID is requested, Gateways and Nodes signal their support by conducting a Gateway or Node transaction in the ORC, adding the ID to their registry. The transaction acts of proof of their support of the ID, which allows for Gateways and Nodes to search for each other to offer more complete datasets, without needing to know each other prior. This allows for the network to become more decentralized, as Nodes and Gateway can employ a standard internal, private reputation system of their connections based on uptime and API tokens at stake, with initial communication driven by a desire to include additional IDs into their service offering. Additionally, the Dispute Resolution Contract (DRC) protocol references IDs in each dispute, such that API token holders can be fully knowledgeable of the matter of dispute.

