# What does API mean for the crypto industry?

The blockchain space is rapidly growing, with traditional Web developers spending significant time learning new schools, such as how to write Solidity, manage full nodes, and construct databases on top of their full nodes. The APIS will remove this barrier immediately for NFT gaming projects, by synthesizing public blockchain data and converting it into easily accessible, understandable and actionable information. Consequently, we will allow NFT application developers globally to integrate highly performant user interfaces into their applications, which would otherwise require months of development. Soon, we will offer write solutions too, thus reducing the need for these developers to learn Solidity or additional programming architectures.

Outside of The APIS, APIs have already permeated throughout decentralized finance (DeFi), a market we are not initially focused on due to our belief that our edge in the NFT market will garner us greater market-share, but a market we are very excited about entering next. Professional traders and hedge funds utilize algorithmic trading to execute automated trading strategies, in which both price and trade execution APIs are integral and thus highly valuable. Real-time pricing and live execution APIs are required for trading bots to operate in a fully-automated “hands-off” mode. Since the rise in popularity of algorithmic trading, even individual traders are using APIs to manage their portfolio. Automating both the read of pricing data, as well as creating write tools to allow investors to automate their portfolios, will prove to be highly valuable services in Web3.

\
